# Core concepts and caveats

> [!CAUTION]
> One-time Pads are only as secure as the quality and secrecy of the pad.
> Please see Perfect Noise's [disclaimer](./DISCLAIMER.md).

The One-time pad is a powerful form of encryption -- offering the possibility of
[perfect secrecy](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/One-time_pad#Perfect_secrecy).
Even so, the system also comes with a number of limitations and
can easily be broken if [mishandled](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/One-time_pad#Problems).

A one-time pad (or key) is a string of random characters that are paired
character-by-character with a plaintext message.
If the key is truly random, then there is no way to guess
the original value of any given character that is encrypted.
Hence, perfect secrecy.

The above "if" is a big one.
Generating a truly random sequence of characters
(technically, binary digits) is not trivial.
Perfect Noise relies on random strings
[generated by the operating system](https://docs.python.org/3/library/os.html#os.urandom).
Techniques for enhancing the quality of the operating system's
[pseudorandom number generator](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pseudorandom_number_generator) exist,
but are outside of the scope of general use of Perfect Noise.

Even if a perfectly random one-time pad is created,
the pad becomes useless if it is known to anyone other than
the owner and intended recipient of the message.
Therefore it is _critical_ that the one-time pad be shared by a secure means
and guarded against unintended access.
Put differently, the security of a message encrypted using a one-time pad
is only as strong as the degree to which the one-time pad itself is protected.

Perfect Noise attempts to preserve the secrecy of the one-time pad by:
- insisting that the Pad's operating system access is set to user-only
- immediately deleting any portion of the pad after it has been used to encrypt or decrypt a message
- encrypting the pad at rest using a user password

These precautions are no substitute for taking every precaution possible to protect the pad however.

*Perfect Noise, by itself, cannot guarantee the cryptographic quality or confidentiality of the one-time pad it creates.*

After a user builds a Perfect Noise Pad and
[_securely_ delivers](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/One-time_pad#Key_distribution) the Pad to another user,
the two users are able to exchange encrypted messages.

When a Pad is used to encrypt or decrypt a message, the associated Pad data is _immediately_ destroyed
as a precaution against being [reused](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Venona_project#Decryption).
